---
layout: book
title: Chapter 6 | Usability Engineering
permalink: /rmit/books/usability-engineering-scenario-based/chapter-06/
book_title: Usability Engineering - Scenario-Based Development of Human Computer Interaction
book_authors: Mary Beth Rosson, John M. Carrol
book_publisher: Morgan Kaufman Publishers, Academic Press, San Francisco 2002
---

h2. Chapter 6 - Prototyping

A *prototype* is a concrete but partial implementation of a system design.

A *user interface prototype* is a prototype built to explore usability issues.

h3. Common approaches to prototyping in usability engineering

|_. Type of prototype |_. Description |
| Storyboard | Sketches or screenshots illustrating key points in a usage narrative |
| Paper or cardboard mock-up | Fabricated devices with simulated controls or display elements |
| Wizard of Oz | Workstation connected to invisible human assistant who simulates input, output, or processing functionality not yet available |
| Video prototype | Video recording of persons enacting one or more envisioned tasks |
| Computer animation | Screen transitions that illustrate a series of input and output events |
| Scenario machine | Interactive system implementing a specific scenario's event system |
| Rapid prototype | Interactive system created with special-purpose prototyping tools | 
| Working partial system | Executable version of a system with a subset of intended functionality |

p(tradeoff).
Detailed special-purpose prototypes help to answer specific questions about a design, BUT building a meaningful prototype for each issue is expensive.

p(tradeoff).
Realistic prototypes increase the validity of user test data, BUT may postpone testing, or require construction of customized (throw-away) prototypes.

p(tradeoff).
Iterative refinement of an implementation enables continual testing and feedback, BUT may discourage consideration of radical transformations.

p(tradeoff).
Dynamic environments encourage experimentation and change, BUT many small design changes may lead to complex software that is difficult to maintain.
