---
layout: book
title: Chapter 3 | Project Management in Practice, Fifth Edition
permalink: /rmit/books/pm-practice/chapter-03/
book_title: Project Management in Practice, Fifth Edition
book_authors: Meredith, Shafer, Mantel, Sutton
book_publisher: John Wiley & Sons Inc., New Jersey, 2014
---

h1. Chapter 3 - Project Activity and Risk Planning

Careful planning is strongly associated with project success. 

It is difficult to define the golden path between no-planning and overplanning ("paralysis by analysis").

h2. The Basis of a Project Plan - The "Project Charter"

The project plan serves as the map for the route to be taken by the PM to lead the project from start to finish.

The Project Charter is in practice an abridge version of what will become the full project plan. It is the first artefact to be produced in the lifespan of the project.

The Project Charter requires sign off from the major stakeholders. Thereafter, any changes to the Charter requires acceptance from the signatories.

The eight categories of the Project Charter are:

h3. 1. Purpose

* Business Case for the project
* Strategic reasons
* Expected profitability and competitive effects
* Defined scope
* Technical results
* The reasons why the organization is undertaking the project

h3. 2. Objectives

* Detailed description of scope: deliverables and outcomes
* _Mission statement_
* Communicates to project team members what will be done to achieve objectives
* "Project scope plus expected desirable outcomes that accrue to stakeholders from matters beyond the project's deliverables"

h3. 3. Overview

* Brief description of project and scope
* Major milestones or significant events in schedule
* Constraints on project scope
* Senior management is the audience
* Technological and managerial approaches are described
* Possibly project defined as "derivative", "platform", or "breakthrough" in relation to other projects within the organization
* Use of consultants or sub-contractors
* Agreements with clients or third-parties
* Reporting requirements
* Technical specifications of deliverables
* Delivery dates
* Incentives or penalties
* Change management

h3. 4. Schedules

* Summary of schedules and milestones
* High level: show only major tasks of WBS

h3. 5. Resource requirements

* Estimates for expenses: capital and operating
* Costs for each task
* Accounting details
* _Project budget_
* Cost monitoring and control

h3. 6. Personnel and stakeholders

* Describe stakeholders, sponsor, PM and possibly some members of team
* Notes special skill requirements or training requirements
* May also note time phasing of personnel, combined with schedule
* May also show RACI matrix

h3. 7. Risk management

* Risk identification
* Qualitative and quantitative analysis
* Response (contingency) planning
* Monitoring and control

h3. 8. Evaluation methods

* Evaluation procedures
* Quality standards
* Corporate compliance with reporting and data collection

This is a contract specifying the process of potential problem solving between the project's principals in addition to the content of project deliverables.

h2. The Planning Process - Overview

Planning techniques are generic. 

1. Develop and evaluate the concept of the project. 
	- Basic performance characteristics
	- Is deliverable worthwhile?

2. Identify and describe plainly the actual capabilities that the deliverable must comprise in order for it to be successful. Design system, service or product.

3. Create such a system, service or product.

4. Test prototype to determine it has desired capabilities. Return to step 3 until deliverable matches preset requirements. 

5. Integrate deliverable into system for which it was designed. (Install)

6. Validate the deliverable

7. Can client operate the system? If not instruct client.

8. If client can operate and accepts deliverable, hand over the deliverable and ancillary artefacts such as maintenance documents.


h2. The Planning Process - The Nuts and Bolts

h3. The Launch Meeting - and Subsequent Meetings

When PM is appointed to lead a new project he must review the objectives first with the senior manager responsible for the project. This is so that the PM:

1. Understands the stakeholders' expectations
2. Identify senior managers who have an interest in the project
3. Determine if project is not typical of its category (e.g. produce development project)

Invitees to the launch meeting:

* Project champion (senior manager most interested)
* Functional managers who have resources that will be utilized by the project (competencies and capabilities)
* Subject matter experts

Topics to be addresssed or presented at the launch meeting:

* The contributions to the organization expected from the project
* Possible priority of the project
* Budgetary estimates
* Any due dates of deliverables

Senior management remain during meeting while PM conducts it to ensure functional managers are assured there is real commitment by the organization for the project.

The launch meeting may also be a brainstorming session that develops action items that become projects. If participative decision making is in play, then the meetings are worth the effort. 

The results of the launch meeting:

1. The project scope is understood
2. The functional managers understand their responsibilities and have committed to making plans
3. Potential benefits to the organization outside the scope of the project are noted

It is important that any changes to the project plan during this phase are communicated to all those who were participants of the launch meeting and other interested parties.  


h3. Sorting Out the Project - The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)

The primary purpose for creating a WBS is to ensure that any task required to produce a deliverable is not overlooked and is omitted from the plan.

The _hierarchical planning process_ is the basis for generating a WBS. It starts by listing the primary activities that when completed will achieve the project objective(s). These are Level 1 activities.
The planner may then delegate or keep to himself the responsibility for determining the Level 2 activities that will in total will see the completion of the parent Level 1 activity. For each Level 2 activity, another person or group is given the responsibility for prepare action plans for the sub-tasks of each Level 2 activity, forming Level 3 activities. 

Each task is decomposed into subtasks until the lowest level clearly demonstrates what needs to be done and continuing to break down tasks is no longer required. 

Each level of activity must describe the same degree of detail.

The WBS is generally oriented toward the project's deliverables.

The WBS may be expanded to include:

* Immediate predecessor tasks (_predecessors_)
* Estimated time duration
* Estimated resources
* Assigned to (personnel, responsibility)

h3. RACI Matrix

* *R*esponsible: undertakes the task
* *A*ccountable: ensures task is completed
* *C*onsult: ask for expertise
* *I*nform: notify progress and changes

Organizes the project team by clarifying responsibilities of the project team members. The each cell of the matrix shows the category of the link between a team member and task.

h3. Mind Mapping

A brainstorming activity that starts with the project goal at the centre, then tasks are identified that will lead to the completion of that goal and are linked to it. Then tasks are subsequently broken down into more detailed sub-tasks that at the furthest extent from the project goal only have a label containing a noun and verb.

h2. Risk Management

Six sub-processes are involved in completing the three tasks of: risk identification, risk analysis, and response to risk.

h3. 1. Risk Management Planning

* Maybe in the charge of a risk management group
* Steps 2-5 must be designed carefully
* The outputs from steps 2-5 are inputs to the following step
* Is a continuous process that tracks the variability of factors that cause uncertainty

h3. 2-3. Risk Identification and Qualitative Risk Analysis

A thorough study of all sources of risk to identify:

* highly probable risks
* extremely serious risks
* highly vulnerable areas

*Scenario Analysis*

* Work through likely scenarios that will have dramatic impacts on the organization or the project objectives; consider possible outcomes of these events
* Analysis of the WBS, RACI matrix and PERT chart

*Failure Mode and Effect Analysis*

1. List ways the project may fail
2. List consequences of each failure and evaluate its severity. This quantity "S" can be ranked from "1" (no effect) to "10" (very hazardous failure occurs without warning).
3. List the causes of each failure and estimate their likelihood of occuring. This quantity "L" can be ranked from "1" (no chance) to "10" (almost certain to occur).
4. Estimate the ability to detect each failure identified. This quantity "D" can be ranked from "1" (monitoring systems will detect failure) to "10" (virtually certain failure will not be detected).
5. Calculate _Risk Priority Number (RPN)_ by multiplying _S_, _L_, and _D_ together.
6. Sort list of potential failures by the RPNs and consider ways for reducing the risk associated with failures and high RPNs.

*Sample FMEA for New Product Development Project at Pharmaceutical Company*

table(grid).
|_. Failiure |_. S |_. L |_. D |_. RPN |
| Not effective | 8 | 6 | 5 | 240 |
| Not safe | 8 | 4 | 5 | 160 |
| Drug interacts with other drugs | 6 | 3 | 8 | 144 |
| Can't produce | 6 | 4 | 4 | 96 |
| Beat to market | 7 | 3 | 2 | 42 |


h3. 4. Quantitative Risk Analysis

*Estimates*

Probability for an failure occuring is more difficult to determine than the range and timing of the failure due to lack of available data. Probability is usually estimated according to the experience of SMEs.

*Expected Value*

The value of outcome multiplied by the probability of that outcome occuring is added to a decision table (or payoff matrix).

*Simulation*

Software is used to calculate the likely costs of failure.

It is dependent on reliable, honest estimates of variables supplied by people connected to the project.

h3. 5. Risk Response Planning

Contingency plans and logic charts are developed to describe the tasks and activities that are required to mitigate the impact of failure and respond to the failure.

h3. 6. Risk Monitoring and Control

Records are kept to show how the project dealt with risks.

The Risk Management Group should be on the lookout for improving techniques for measuring and handling risk and for estimating the impact of risk.

The Risk Management Group should provide an ongoing evaluation of current risk identification, measurement, analysis and response techniques.

<nav class="nav-chapters">
    <ul>
        <li class="prev-chapter"><a href="../chapter-02/">Previous chapter</a></li>
        <li class="index"><a href="../index.html">Index</a></li>
        <li class="next-chapter"><a href="../chapter-04/">Next chapter</a></li>
    </ul>
</nav>
