---
layout: rmit
title: Software Engineering Project Management | Semester 2, 2015 | RMIT
permalink: /rmit/project-management/exam/
---

"Index":../

h1. Exam Preparation

h2. Structure of The Exam

The exam is divided into 4 secions:

# Project Management - Concepts _(20 marks)_
# Project Management - Implementation _(25 marks)_
# Methodology - Concepts _(10 marks)_
# Methodology - Implementation _(25 marks)_

9 questions with sub parts. 80 marks in total.

h2. Content of The Exam

h3. Week 1

"Notes":../week-01/

Lecture notes: Slides 16 - 62

* Definition of a project
* Definition of project management
* Three goals of project management
## Scope
## Cost
## Time
* Risk (uncertainty)
* Risk - the fourth project goal
* Project methodologies
** Software development lifecycles
* Why projects fail
* Standards for project management
** PMBOK
** PRINCE2 (not examinable in detail)
* Higher-level project coordination
** Portfolio management
** Program management
** Project Management Office (PMO)
** Projects and strategic planning
* PMBOK Guide
* Role of project manager

Textbook: Chapter 1: pp 1-9, 22-31

h3. Week 2

"Notes":../week-02/

Lecture notes: Slides 5-74

* Enterprise Environmental Factors
* Project life cycle
* Project stakeholders
* Organizational influences
* Organization structure
** Functional
** Matrix - weak, balanced, strong
** Projectized
* Project process groups:
## Initiating
## Planning
## Executing
## Monitoring and Controlling
## Closing
* Project management knowledge areas
** Integration
** Scope
** Time
** Cost
** Quality
** Human resources
** Communications
** Risk management
** Procurement
* Project integration management
* Planning:
** "Ready, aim, fire"
** "Paralysis by analysis"
* Project charter
** Purpose
** Objectives
** Overview
** Schedule (WBS)
** Resource requirements
** Personnel and stakeholders
** Risk management
** Evaluation methods
* Planning process
* Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
* RACI Matrix
* Mind-mapping
* Risk Management
## Risk management planning
## Risk identification
## Qualitative risk analysis
## Quantitative risk analysis
## Risk response planning
## Risk monitoring and control
* Develop project management plan
* Direct and manage project execution
* Monitor and control project work
* Perform integrated change control
* Close project or phase

Textbook: Chapter 2: pp 106- _Plymouth Zoo's Re-engineering Project_
Textbook: Chapter 3: pp 76-97, 98-103

Tutorial: All of it

h3. Week 3

"Notes":../week-03/

Lecture: slides 19-26

* Common problem solving (within teams)
## Define the Problem
## Identify and define the Root Causes
## Fishbone diagram (_ishikawa_)
## Generate alternative solutions
## Evaluate the alternatives
## Agree on the best solution
## Develop an Action Plan
## Implement and evaluation the solution

[-Textbook: Chapter 5: pp 151, 181-188 _scheduling the project_-]
Textbook: Chapter 6: pp 207-213, 221-223 _allocating resources to the project_

Tutorial: Read all of it

*Expectations:* 

* Perform risk analysis and provide mitigation strategies for a given scenario
* Create RACI matrix and perform FMEA analysis for a given scenario

*Ignore:*

* Gantt charts
* Microsoft Project

h3. Week 4

"Notes":../week-04/

Lecture notes: slides 11-16

* Critical Path Method (CPM)
* ES, EF, LS, LF
* Network of nodes
* Activity slack

Lecture notes: slides 34-69

* Project monitoring
* Design monitoring system
* Data collection and reporting
* Earned value
* Project variances
* Project control
* Common mistakes
* Types and tools for control

[+Textbook: Chapter 5: pp 153, 156-159 - PERT and CPM networks+]
Textbook: Chapter 7: pp 244-271 _monitoring and controlling the project_

Tutorial: Read all of it

*Expectations:*

* Calculate variances: EV, AC, PV, CPI, SPI
* Critical path for network diagram and ES, EF, LS, LF

*Ignore:*

* Scope creep
* Change control

h3. Week 5

Lecture notes: slides 6-25

* Project methodologies
* Traditional waterfall
* Traditional SDLC
* Assumptions underlying the Waterfall model
* Rational Unified Process
* Compare PMBOK to RUP

Lecture notes: slides 31-34

* Agile
* What Agile is best suited to
* Agile manifesto
* Agile principles
* Agile methods

Lecture notes: slides 42-47

* Agile- Scrum
* Product backlog
* User stories
* Release backlog
* Sprints

Tutorial: Read all of it

h3. Week 6

Lecture notes: All slides

* Agile and Scrum
* What Agile is
* Is Agile related to Scrum
* People in Scrum
* Backlogs
* Sprints
* Daily Scrum
* Scrum master
* Product owner
* Scrum team
* Scrum meetings
** Sprint planning
** Daily scrum
** Sprint review
** Sprint retrospective
* Story points
* Sprint velocity

Watch associated videos.

Tutorial: Read all of it

h3. Week 7

Lecture notes: All slides

* Is Agile different than Scrum?
* Is Scrum a fad?
* Backlog grooming
* Common pitfalls
* What happens when a team falls behind
* Scrum - supporting cast
* Identification of an additional task
* Sprint review meeting
* Sprint retrospective meeting
* Scrum of Scrums
* Product increment
* Definition of Done
* Sashimi
* Scrum But
* Terms:
** Spike
** Tracer Bullet
** Abnormal Termination
** Scrum-ban
* Limitations of Scrum
* Scrum certification

Watch associated videos.

Tutorial: Read all of it

h3. Week 8

Lecture notes: All slides

* Lean practices
* Five principles of Lean
## Understand _and_ maximise value
## Optimise the value stream
## Pull production
## Single-piece flow
## Continuous improvement (_Kaizen_)
* Kanban
* How does Agile fit in?
* Lean mindset (misconceptions / perspectives)
* Implementation of Lean

* Project Quality and Metrics
* Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI)
* Quality Assurance
* Standards and Procedures
* Audits
* Software metrics
* Internal and external control

Tutorial: Read all of it

*Expectations:*

* Illustrate how to plan, execute and close Lean projects
* Use project management frameworks
* Simulate regular Lean project management meetings
* Comprehend quality and metrics

h3. Week 9

Lecture notes: All slides

* Lean principles used by Toyota
* Apply Lean asa methodology to Project Management
* Lean execution phase
* Criticism of Lean
* Agile practices found in industry
* Disciplineed Agile Delivery (DAD)

Watch associated videos.

Tutorial: Read all of it

*Expectations:*

* Illustrate how to plan, execute and close Lean projects
* Use project management frameworks
* Simulate regular Lean project management meetings
* Understand Agile better

h3. Week 10

Lecture notes: All slides

Apparently this lecture will not appear in the exam. However, it won't hurt to skim:

* Project manager roles and responsibilities
* Factors of a successful team

Textbook: Chapter 2: pp 35-73 _The manager, the organization and the team_
Textbook: Chapter 8: pp 280-293 _Evaluating and terminating the project_

Tutorial: Read all of it

h3. Week 11

Lecture notes: All slides

* Case studies
* Budgeting
* Budgeting problems
* Top-down budgeting
* Bottom-up budgeting
* Cost estimating
* Budget uncertainty

Textbook: Chapter 4: pp 112-130 _budgeting the project_
Textbook: Chapter 6: pp 200-235 _allocating resources to the project_

Tutorial: Read all of it

h2. Assignment Section

* Given a scenario
* Implement Scrum techniques
* Practice exam scenarios from previous exams
