---
layout: rmit
title: Software Engineering Project Management | Semester 2, 2015 | RMIT
permalink: /rmit/project-management/week-05/
---

h1. Week 5

h2. Project Methodology - Traditional Waterfall

h3. Stages

# Requirements defintion
# System & software design
# Implementation & unit testing
# Integration & system testing
# Operation & maintenance
# Disappointment and rejection (in about 72% of case in 2000)

* Each stage cannot begin until the previous stage is complete.
* Output of one step is input for the next step
* Separate and distinct phases of specification and development
* Separate and distinct application of resources

h3. Problems

* Inflexible when it comes to changed requirements
* Inappropriate for releases that push out a new version
* Failure or success is not known until too late
* Errors found in later phases difficult (and expensive!) to correct
* Customer doesn't know what they want and development teams follow best guesses
* All aspects attempted to be defined prior to work

h3. Assumptions Underlying the Waterfall Model

* Reasonable set of requirements exists that can be understood
* During development changes to requirements will be small enough without having to revise plans
* System integration is necessary and it can be reasonably predicted based on architecture and planning
* R&D and innovation to create significant new software can be done on a predictable schedule

These cause issues because:

* Projects fail to deliver what the customer expected in the predicted time frame
* Rework is expensive and time-consuming
* Risk management difficult to integrate

h2. Project Methodology - Rational Unified Process

* RUP activities create and maintain models rather than the generation of paper documents
* Iterative process with the following advantages over the waterfall model:
** Risks mitigated earlier
** Change is manageable
** Greater reuse
** Project team learns along the way
** Better overall quality
* RUP is maintained like any software tool or product

* Use-case driven
* Architecture centric
* Iterative and incremental in approach

table(grid simple).
|_. RUP |_. PMBOK |
| Software development | Any project type |
| Website delivery with lots of templates, whitepapers & examples | Books and 3 ^rd^ party resources |
| Project management - as well as software development focus | Project management focus |
| Iterative | Progressive elaboration |
| Adapt the process | It is a guide rather than a methodology |
| Phases and iterations specific to software development | Phases are specific to project type |

h3. RUP Phases

*1. Inception*

*2. Elaboration*

*3. Construction*

*4. Transition*




<nav class="nav-lectures">
	<ul>
		<li class="prev-lecture"><a href="../week-04/">Previous</a></li>
		<li class="index"><a href="../exam/">Exam Prep</a></li>
		<li class="next-lecture"><a href="../week-06/">Next</a></li>
	</ul>
</nav>