---
layout: rmit
title: Software Engineering Project Management | Semester 2, 2015 | RMIT
permalink: /rmit/project-management/week-03/
---

h1. Week 3

h2. Resource Loading

*Resource loading* is the scheduled use of certain resources for a specified activity at a specified time for a planned duration.

Each resource should have a calendar denoting their availabilty, the hours and days they work each week, and any holidays the resource will not be available.

Resource cost per unit time and cost for overtime or overuse should also be recorded on the calendar.

Problems arise for the PM when a resource is overscheduled. Problems such as stress and burnout for the resource and questions asked by senior management about why projects are not finishing on time.

h2. Allocating Scarce Resources to Projects

There are common rules for what order a scarce resouce will be assigned to activities.

* *As soon as possible* - Standard rule in scheduling. Usually at the earliest start times (ES)
* *As late as possible* - Activities start on the latest start times (LS) without increasing the project's duration
* *Shortest task duration first* - This rule maximizes the number of tasks that can be completed in a given time period
* *Minimum slack first* - Tasks are supplied with resources in inverse order of their slacks to minimize the number of late activities
* *Most critical followers* - Activities with the highest number of critical successors on the critical path(s) take precedence
* *Most successors* - Activities with the highest number of successors, not necessarily critical
* *Most resources first* - The greater the use of the specific resource on a task, the higher the task's priority for the resource.


<nav class="nav-lectures">
	<ul>
		<li class="prev-lecture"><a href="../week-02/">Previous</a></li>
		<li class="index"><a href="../exam/">Exam Prep</a></li>
		<li class="next-lecture"><a href="../week-04/">Next</a></li>
	</ul>
</nav>