---
layout: rmit
title: Software Engineering Project Management | Semester 2, 2015 | RMIT
permalink: /rmit/project-management/week-10/
---

h1. Week 10

h2. Project Manager's Roles

* Facilitator
* Communicator

Must also take a "systems approach" to understand how everything impacts the overall project.

h2. Project Manager's Responsibilities

* To senior management
** Don't ever surprise the boss
* To the client
** Manage expectations
* To the project team
** Facilitate the team's success
* To the project
** Resource acquisition
** Fighting fires and obstacles

h2. Skills of Persuasion

* Must be credible
* Find goals in common
* Vivid language and compelling evidence
* Empathetic

h2. Five Dysfunctions of a Team

# Absence of truse
# Fear of conflict
# Lack of commitment
# Avoidance of accountability
# Inattention to results

h2. Four Important Dimensions of Project Success

# Efficiency in meeting the budget and schedule
# Customer impact and satisfaction
# Business success
# Future potential

h2. Four Generic Factors Associated with Project Failure

# A project was not required for this task in the first place
# Insufficient support from senior management
# Naming the wrong project manager
# Poor up-front planning

h2. Types of Project Termination

* Project extinction - Project activity suddenly stops as it has completed successfully or it is about to fail
* Termination-by-addition - In-house project is successful and is incorporated as a new formal part of the organization
* Termiantion-by-integration - Project output becomes standard part of the client's operations
* Termination-by-starvation - A project's budget is squeezed dry when it is impolitic to terminate it directly


<nav class="nav-lectures">
	<ul>
		<li class="prev-lecture"><a href="../week-09/">Previous</a></li>
		<li class="index"><a href="../exam/">Exam Prep</a></li>
		<li class="next-lecture"><a href="../week-11/">Next</a></li>
	</ul>
</nav>