---
layout: rmit
title: Software Engineering Project Management | Semester 2, 2015 | RMIT
permalink: /rmit/project-management/week-07/
---

h1. Week 7

h2. ScrumBut Symptoms

* Reports to Scrum Master at stand-up
* Developers keep getting ahead of testers
* Falling behind on regulatory documentation
* Failed customer demo demoralizes the team
* Team members are afraid to try new ideas because they might fail
* Retrospectives focus on who rather than what

h2. Other Scrum terms

h3. Spike

A story or task aimed at answering a question or gathering information, rather than at producing shippable product. "Spike - Agile Dictionary":http://agiledictionary.com/209/spike/.

A spike:

* May discover the work cannot be implemented for any practical purpose
* May discover the work can be used for great benefit on future stories
* Is not to implement the completed work "as is"
* Must have clear objectives and outcomes
* Must be timeboxed

Reference: "Spikes and the Effort-to-Grief Ratio":https://www.scrumalliance.org/community/articles/2013/march/spikes-and-the-effort-to-grief-ratio

h3. Tracer Bullet

A very narrow implementation in production quality of an epic/large user story and is usually an indicator that the user story is too large in estimation. "Research, Spikes, Tracer Bullets, Oh My!":http://www.gettingagile.com/2007/10/22/research-spikes-tracer-bullets-oh-my/

The purpose of a tracer bullet is to examine how an end-to-end process will work to assess its feasibility. "Agile Dictionary - Tracer Bullet":http://www.requirementally.com/agile-dictionary-tracer-bullet/

h3. Abnormal Termination

An abnormal termination is essentially blowing up the sprint and starting a new sprint instead. An abnormal termination is most frequently the result of a dramatic shift in business priorities - something previously considered important is no longer important, or something even more important is discovered. "Making the Decision to Abnormally Terminate a Sprint":http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/blog/making-the-decision-to-abnormally-terminate-a-sprint

Reasons for an Abnormal Sprint Termination may include, but are not limited to:

* The company changes direction
* Market forces render the work obsolete
* A major technology change occurs
* A better technical solution is found that makes the current Sprint’s activity throwaway work
* Fundamental and urgent external changes that invalidate the Sprint Goal or the bulk of the functionality
* Urgent bug fix or feature development request that cannot wait until the normal completion of the Sprint

"Abnormal Termination of a Sprint":http://agileatlas.org/articles/item/abnormal-termination-of-a-sprint

h3. Scrum-ban

Compare Kanban, Scrum and Scrum-ban:

table(grid simple).
|_. |_. Kanban |_. Scrum |_. Scrum-ban |
| Daily stand ups | No | Yes | Yes |
| Artifacts | None | Backlog, Current work, Burndown charts | Current work |
| Metrics | Lead time / Cycle time | Velocity | Lead Time / Cycle time |
| Demo | Not used | Required | Optional |
| Skill sets | Specialized | Cross-Functional | Either specialized or cross-functional |
| Iterations | No | Yes | No |
| New Work | Prioritized immediately | Prioritized at Sprint Planning Meeting | Prioritized immediately |
| Retrospective | Not used | Required | Optional |
| Defined roles | None | PO, Scrum Master, Scrum Team | PO, Scrum Master, Scrum Team |

"A Quick Comparison of Scrum-ban, Kanban, and Scrum":http://www.requirementally.com/a-quick-comparison-of-scrum-ban-kanban-and-scrum/

"Scrum-ban":http://leansoftwareengineering.com/ksse/scrum-ban/

h2. Other References

"You May Be a Scrum-But":http://www.scrumalliance.org/community/articles/2013/february/you-may-be-a-scrum-but/

"The Servant Leader":https://www.scrumalliance.org/community/articles/2014/october/the-servant-leader 

"Scrum Inc":http://www.scruminc.com/scrumlab-open/

<nav class="nav-lectures">
	<ul>
		<li class="prev-lecture"><a href="../week-06/">Previous</a></li>
		<li class="index"><a href="../exam/">Exam Prep</a></li>
		<li class="next-lecture"><a href="../week-08/">Next</a></li>
	</ul>
</nav>