---
layout: rmit
title: Software Engineering Project Management | Semester 2, 2015 | RMIT
permalink: /rmit/project-management/week-09/
---

h1. Week 9

h2. Lean principles used by Toyota

# Base your management decisions on a long-term philosophy, even at the expense of short-term financial goals
# Create a continuous process flow to bring problems to the surface
# Use "pull" systems to avoid overproduction
# Level out the workload (_heijunka_)
# Build a culture of stopping to fix the problems, to get the quality right the first time
# Standardise tasks and processes
# Use visual control so no problems are hidden
# Use only reliable, thoroughly tested technology that serves your people and processes
# Grow leaders who thoroughly understand the work, live the philosophy, and teach it to others
# Develop exceptional people and teams who follow your company's philosophy
# Respect your extended network of partners and suppliers by challenging them and helping them improve
# Go and see for yourself to thoroughly understand the situation (management by wondering)
# Make decisions slowly by consensus, throughly considering all options, _and then implement decisions rapidly_
# Become a learning organization through relentless reflection and continuous improvement

h2. Lean Methodology as Project Management

h3. Stage 1 - Initiating Phase

* Assess if project will add value to organization and is inline with vision and mission
* Project Portfolio Management (PMBOK)
* Commence initial phase
** Select project leader who is a Lean expert (9)
** Stakeholder map drawn
** Governance structure chart composed
** Choose the team
** Communication plan created
** Challenges and risks discussed
** Complete Project Charter - output

h3. Stage 2 - Planning Phase

* Outline structure and processes in the project (2, 3, 4, 6)
* Start discussion cycles for process improvement
* Do not overload leaders
* Schedule meetings
** Deliver team
** Cluster
** Work steam
** Project integration
** Service delivery
* Team defines process landscape
* Kick-off for end of phase

h3. Stage 3 - Executing Phase

* RACI matrix
* Unique to project
* Kanban board
* Stand-up meetings
* Risk management through communication
* One person accountable for team
* Decisions taken at lowest level possible - escalate only if important stakeholders need to be made aware
* Team must be 100% motivated that this is the right project for the organization

h3. Stage 4 - Monitoring and Controlling Phase

* Reporting (7)
* Continuous improvement (12)
* Monitor change (8)

h3. Stage 5 - Closing Phase

* Documentation of:
** Best practices
** What worked
** What did not work
* SWOT Analysis, cause and effect diagram (Fishbone diagram)
* Brainstorming
* Resources released
* Termination and closure report
* Handing over

h2. Criticism of Lean

* Lack of consideration of human aspects
* Lack of creativity
* Promotes culture of incrementalism
* Coping with variable nature of project management
* Does not apply to every project

h2. Agile Practices Found in Industry

* Cross-functional teams
* Iterative and incremental development
* Feature-driven development
* Planning game
* Co-location
* Pair programming

h2. Disciplined Agile Delivery (DAD)

Risk-value delivery lifecycle:

* goal-driven
* enterprise aware
* scalable

Hybrid approach that extends Scrum and blends strategies from:

* Agile Modelling
* Extreme Programming
* Unified Process
* Kanban
* Lean (Software Development)

DAD addresses full end-to-end delivery lifecycle of software development, not just the construction phase focussed on by Scrum.

h2. Resources

"The Hawthorne Effect":https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mV9Wj8ohT0k





<nav class="nav-lectures">
	<ul>
		<li class="prev-lecture"><a href="../week-08/">Previous</a></li>
		<li class="index"><a href="../exam/">Exam Prep</a></li>
		<li class="next-lecture"><a href="../week-10/">Next</a></li>
	</ul>
</nav>