---
layout: rmit
title: Software Engineering Project Management | Semester 2, 2015 | RMIT
permalink: /rmit/project-management/week-02/
---

h1. Week 2

h2. The Project Charter

# *Purpose* - _Business Case_ for the project
# *Objectives* - scope, deliverables and outcomes
# *Overview* - executive summary
# *Schedules* - milestones, WBS
# *Resource requirements* - budget, expenses both operating and capital
# *Personnel and stakeholders* - PM, sponsor, stakeholders, key members of project team
# *Risk management* - identified risks, mitigation plans
# *Evaluation methods* - how to measure effectiveness of outcomes

*Milestone* - An opportunity to assess the project's performance.

h2. The Planning Process

# Launch meeting
# WBS
# RACI Matrix
# Risk management
** Planning
** Identification
** Qualitative analysis (FMEA)
** Quantitative analysis
** Response planning
** Mointoring and control

h2. Tutorial

h3. Contrast project with a non-project

A project is unique, has definite outcomes and is temporary: there is a due date. A project is creating an iPhone app for CFA before the expected start of the bushfire season.

A non-project will not have all of these properties at the same time. A non-project is characterized by business-as-usual activities.

In a project-based organisational structure the employees of a company are organised around projects. Each team is focussed on the successful delivery of the project's outcomes.

h3. Distinction between a program and a project

A program groups projects together that are coherent set of activities that make up a larger, generalised effort. Each project must be managed to ensure they contribute to the overall success of the program.

h3. Why the functional manager should attend the project launch meeting

The functional managers have to give their approval to allow the project manager to allocate the functional managers' personnel to the project.

The project's success may depend on the functional manager's willingness to allow important subordinates to take part in the project.

The cooperation of the functional managers may increase when they have an understanding of the importance of the project. They may also help with the initial plan.

h3. Different types of risk

*Highly probably risks* Likely to eventuate but the degree of impact may be negligible to severe

*Extremely serious risks* Will severely impact the project but the probability is low to high

*Highly vulnerable areas* Highly probable and extremely serious risks. Often associated with activities that are untried and have substantial resources

h3. Problems that arise from an incomplete Project Charter

table(grid simple).
| Purpose | Not meeting strategic reasons for conducting the project |
| Objectives | Missed specifications; ill-defined deliverables |
| Overview | Key milestones missed; opportunities to uncover problems early are missed |
| Schedules | Required tasks overlooked or missing; project misses due date; cost overruns |
| Resource requirements | Failure to have resources available when needed; cost elements are omitted |
| Personel and Stakeholders | Skill requirements and training not considered; not involving critical stakeholders; the schedule may blow out and costs increase | 
| Risk management | Missed plans for risk mitigation that could lead to project delay and/or exceeding the budget; Misunderstood risk assessment; |
| Evaluation methods | Import performance data not captured; timeliness of problem discovery is affected; mislead PM about other project goals not specifically detailed |

<nav class="nav-lectures">
	<ul>
		<li class="prev-lecture"><a href="../week-01/">Previous</a></li>
		<li class="index"><a href="../exam/">Exam Prep</a></li>
		<li class="next-lecture"><a href="../week-03/">Next</a></li>
	</ul>
</nav>