---
layout: book
title: User Stories Applied
permalink: /rmit/books/user-stories-applied/chapter-07/
book_title: User Stories Applied - For Agile Software Development
book_authors: Mike Cohn
book_publisher: Addison Wesley, Boston, 2004
---

h1. Chapter 7 - Guidelines for Good Stories

h2. Start with Goal Stories

For each user role, identify the goals that the user has for interacting with the software. There maybe a primary goal supported by secondary goals which can be turned into stories.

h2. Slice the Cake

For a large story, instead of breaking it apart along technical lines, consider the replacement stories as providing some level of end-to-end functionality. Like slicing a cake, each story should have little from each layer of the software.

To write stories that represent a full slice of the cake provide two benefits:

# Excercising each layer of the architecture reduces the risk of finding last minute problems in one of the layers
# Although not ideal, it is conceivable that the application can be released with only some of its functionality in place, but enough functionality to allow the user to complete tasks.

h2. Write Closed Stories

A closed story is one that finishes with the achievement of a meaningful goal and that allows the user to feel they have accomplished something.

Keep in mind that a story needs to be small enough to be estimable.

h2. Size the Story to the Horizon

* Stories for iterations in the near future can be written small enough to be added to these iterations
* Stories not planned to be included in immediate iterations, can be "fuzzy": large and not precise, close to the horizon of stories. Certainly in the future.

h2. Keep the UI Out as Long as Possible.

Considering user interface details in a story is specifying a solution.

h2. Other Guidelines

* Some things aren't stories
* Include user roles in stories
* Write for one user
* Write in active voice
* Ideally the customer writes the stories
* Don't number story cards - discussions become about numbers rather than features that need to be developed.



<nav class="nav-chapters">
	<ul>
		<li class="prev-chapter"><a href="../chapter-03/">Previous chapter</a></li>
		<li class="index"><a href="../index.html">Index</a></li>
		<li class="next-chapter"><a href="../chapter-09/">Next chapter</a></li>
	</ul>
</nav>

