---
layout: rmit
title: Software Engineering Project Management | Semester 2, 2015 | RMIT
permalink: /rmit/algorithms/week-04/
---

h1. Week 4 - Decrease and Conquer

To solve a problem, use a smaller instance of the problem. Then use the solution from the smaller instance to solve the original problem. The approach may be bottom-up or top-down.

This type of alogrithm my also be called _inductive_ or _incremental_.

h2. Decrease-by-one

This type of algorithm solves a problem by exploiting a relationshiop between a given instance of size _n_ and a smaller instance of size _n_ - 1. 

This may also be known as *decrease by a constant*.

Typical examples are:

* recursive evaluation of _n_! 
* insertion sort
* topological sort

The recurrence relation for investigating time efficiency usually has this form:

T(n) = T(n-1) + f(n)

where function f(n) accounts for the time needed to reduce an instance to a smaller one and then apply that solution to the original instance size.

Note: "top-down" usually involves recursive relations being solved with backward substitution; "bottom-up" usually involves non-recursive techniques such as a sum over a sequence.


h2. Decrease by a Constant-Factor

This type of algorithm solves a problem by reducing its instance of size _n_ to an instance of size n/b (where b=2 for most but not all such algorithms) solving the smaller instance recursively and then, if necessary, extending this solution to the original problem.

Typical examples are:

* binary search
* fake-coin problem

The recurrence relation for investigating time efficiency usually has this form:

T(n) = T(n/b) + f(n)

where b > 1 and function f(n) accounts for the time needed to reduce an instance to a smaller one and then apply that solution to the original instance size.


h2. Variable Size Decrease

The size of reduction for the solution varies with each iteration. 

Typical examples are:

* Search and Insert in a Binary Search Tree
* Euclid’s Algorithm (greatest common denominator)
* Interpolation Search
* Selection by Partitioning - Lomuto
* Game of Nim

The recurrence relation for investigating time efficiency usually has this form:

T(n) = T(n - v) + f(n)

where _v_ is the variable factor and function f(n) accounts for the time needed to reduce an instance to a smaller one and then apply that solution to the original instance size.

h2. Insertion Sort




<nav class="nav-lectures">
	<ul>
		<li class="prev-lecture"><a href="../week-03/">Prev</a></li>
		<li class="index"><a href="../exam/">Exam Prep</a></li>
		<li class="next-lecture"><a href="../week-05/">Next</a></li>
	</ul>
</nav>